I recently acquired a beautiful old Logger’s tape, clearly made in a day when things were meant to last for a long time. The tape and the housing are both made of steel and the entire thing is encased in leather with visible stitches around the perimeter. It’s made by Starrett, one of those venerable old American companies that traces its origins back to a pragmatic New England farmer turned inventor turned entrepreneur. I like to imagine a forester carrying the tape along with his axe and tin lunchbox as he tramps through the snowy woods. For him, the tape would have been an investment. He would have put a few drops of oil into the moving parts every now and then and sent it in for repair if it ever broke.


Shortly after I got it, it did break. The steel tape cracked and pulled completely out of its housing. Not surprising, since it had probably been sitting in someone’s musty basement for the past thirty years. I thought about fixing it myself but there was no way to take it apart without removing the stitching from the leather. I contacted Starrett. The company still exists and they have a repair department. Surely, I thought, not only will they be able to fix it, but they’ll be proud to see that the tool is still in use after so many years.

As it turns out, the company no longer repairs tapes. I called and emailed another half dozen precision tool repair shops but none of them could do it. “The manufacturer stopped making repair kits twenty years ago,” replied one shop, “they are now considered a disposable item.”

I live in a rural place. Like most people who live in rural places, I spend a lot of time driving my car. Most of the miles I drive are quiet ones because there aren’t many radio stations here. When something does come in its usually mainstream country.

Mainstream country songs lodge themselves into the listener’s brain like a botfly. The lyrics are poor enough to offend anyone beyond a sixth grade reading level, but the hooks are so fucking catchy that it’s hard to stop listening. Then, just as quickly as it gets into our heads, its gone. After a few weeks on the charts the song disappears from our brains and from the airwaves entirely.

It’s disposable. Replaced by the next hit, a little bit shittier and a little bit catchier. I haven’t been around long enough to know whether this is a recent phenomenon or just the definition of pop music, but I suspect it’s a little of both. I can’t imagine that in thirty years the current pop country singers will have the respect that Loretta Lynn or Johnny Cash now do.

For a couple of years I worked as a carpenter building mid-range homes. The company that I worked for held itself to higher quality standards than most, but as with any for-profit operation the emphasis was often on getting things done cheaply over getting them done well. Quality, it turns out, simply isn’t profitable in a culture in which people are accustomed to throwing things away every few years.

We used a type of fiber cement siding on most of our houses. Fiber cement siding has almost no redeeming qualities whatsoever. Aside from being difficult and dangerous to work with, it’s so fragile that we destroyed nearly a third of our supply during construction. But it’s cheap. And it’s low maintenance. In fact, it’s zero maintenance. Once a board breaks there’s nothing you can do but tear it off your house and throw it away. Wood, on the other hand, is expensive. It takes some maintenance to keep it up, but unlike fiber cement it gains character as it weathers. If taken care of, wood siding will outlast fiber cement and pay for itself in the long run. Too many of us have little interest in maintenance and little time for long runs.

Our cars are difficult to maintain even if we want to. They have become so complex that it’s hard for a layman to make the most basic repairs. A belt broke on the last car I had. It would’ve been easy enough to replace myself, except that in order to access it I would’ve had to remove the alternator, making it a much more complex job. As a result of this, most of us don’t have the opportunity to learn how our cars work. If we break down in the middle of nowhere, we’re shit out of luck. If we do find a shop, it would be easy for a nefarious mechanic to take advantage of our naivete.

Why does any of this matter? It matters because when we take care of our things we take care of ourselves. It matters because, as Robert Pirsig wrote in Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, “the real cycle you’re working on is a cycle called yourself.” When we grow accustomed to throw-away tools, throw-away music, and throw-away materials, we start to treat other things as disposable too. We fail to see the value in things that are irreplaceable. We take relationships for granted. We don’t invest in education, community, or other things that have a long term payoff rather than a short term reward.

Forests were considered disposable until the early 1900s. In 1907, just after nearly every tree in the eastern U.S. was cut down, a massive flood inundated Pittsburgh. Without trees, there was nothing to hold the soil in place. Without soil, there was nothing to absorb heavy rains and melting snow that spring. The tiny creeks that flowed down from the mountains swelled, overwhelmed the Monongahela River, and crushed a city. In response, Congress passed the Weeks Act which created National Forests in the east. Today, the conservation movement is stronger than ever.

Quality food has become important too. It’s suddenly hip to care where our vegetables come from. Farming, the foundation of all civilization, is trendy. With the slow food movement we’ve acknowledged that our bodies (the place where food goes), can only be as good as the place where food comes from.

What I’m striving for is something of a “slow days” movement, where instead of selling so many of our waking hours to employers we give time and attention to things that make us function. This means taking time to prepare real meals, send handwritten letters, and tinker with machines.

“Slow days” isn’t the greatest catch phrase. It doesn’t even really make sense since our days wouldn’t be slow, but filled with a more fulfilling busyness. I would come up with something better, but it’s getting dark and I need to change the oil in my car while there’s still some daylight.

