People fear what they don’t understand. But that’s not an explanation for the denigration of our intellectuals and scientists; it’s actually the reason why we have them, and why they’re so valuable.

The perception of a gulf between science and everyday life is fed by an elitism which is probably as old as our methods of recording information in writing — at least 5000 years. For many centuries in western history, the Catholic Church controlled the basic education which underpins science; later, it became the province of universities which only the wealthy could access.

Today, this elitism remains so deeply embedded in the western world view that it’s very easily exploited. Political power can be bolstered by it because people who are taught not to trust their own ability to see what goes on in the world can then be taught to believe almost anything else. Not only do people fear what they don’t understand; they also tend not to make much attempt to understand the things they’re taught to fear. Throughout the history of modern democracy, there’s been a strong relationship between ostracism of an educated “elite” and repression of the general population, both of which are made easier by convincing them to fear each other.

The truth is that the difference between the two in terms of reasoning skills is largely in our heads; what matters most is the quality of information that we use in our reasoning.

And a more recent, more sophisticated and more dangerous innovation in repression — the currently popular conservative habit of teaching very poorly informed people that there’s no difference between good and bad information, and therefore never any need to add more information to what’s in your head already — isn’t just taking advantage of the principles of individualism and equality. It’s also a deliberate and very cynical move to hamstring the use of practical reason in general. Practical reasoning based on high-quality information is the clearest threat to the profitability of global corporatism — the only respected ethic of the most powerful people today.

To undermine the damaging elitist attitudes toward science and other kinds of specialized knowledge, remember these simple facts about people:

We all have theories about how the world works.
If you expect toast to be the result of heating bread; if you see dark clouds in the sky and think it’s likely to rain; if you get dinner ready in preparation for your partner coming home from work — you’re working with a set of justifiable theories, just like science does.
We all seek out new information to solve problems.
If you look up a name to find a telephone number; if you get a quote from a mechanic before booking your car in to be serviced; if you check on a friend’s Facebook profile to find out if their baby has been born yet — you’re collecting data from relevant sources, just like science does.
We all do experiments.
If you test the temperature of the water with your hand before getting under the shower; if you sometimes try a new drink to see if you like it; if you go on a date with someone to find out if you might be compatible with them in a relationship — you’re conducting experiments, just like science does.
We all use logic and critical reasoning.
If you turn on an air-conditioner because it’s warm in your house; if you fill your car up with gas because you don’t want to run out of fuel; if you’re able to find your keys in the morning despite not remembering clearly where you left them — you’re using the same deductive reasoning processes science does.
We all make mistakes.
If you were counting on a higher price for your house than you ended up selling it for; if you get stuck in traffic and arrive late for work; if you’re hurrying down Main Street and collide with somebody coming out of a store — you’ve failed to allow for unforeseen possibilities, just like science frequently does.
We all depend on the know-how of others.
If you trust a dentist to fill your teeth, but wouldn’t want to try it yourself; if you ask a total stranger for directions to the nearest drug-store; if you borrow a DIY book from the library so you can learn how to fix your leaky tap — you’re relying on other people to help you out with knowledge you don’t have.

