For over two weeks I’ve been based in the Russian-occupied peninsula of Crimea, with the occasional trip to Moscow and Kyiv. Earlier this week I was booked on a flight back home to Washington, via a NATO debriefing in Brussels. Unfortunately that plan was cancelled at the last minute so I could spend more time in an actual war zone.


We’re surrounded on all sides by tens of thousands of Russian troops, with enough post-Soviet technology to wipe the Ukrainian military (and us) off the map, and force the country of Ukraine into two warring sides based solely on the languages one speaks — or so Russian President Vladimir V. Putin would have you believe. Journalists are being tracked, spied on, detained, beaten, and murdered. Up to a dozen democratic activists have been detained at gunpoint or snatched off the street and haven’t been seen in almost a week — we know where they are, at an undisclosed FSB (Russian secret intelligence services) base in central Crimea. (Journalists are simply taken to a lesser FSB base located inside the Russian naval base in Sevastopol.) To my great luck, I haven’t been spotted yet, despite my ventures all over the autonomous republic of Ukraine.


Many great and brave journalists are risking a great deal to cover the events of the past two weeks under extreme pressure from Crimean self-defense units (under the command of Russian military officers). They’ve been followed, harassed, beaten, and in one case, I was able to disarm a Russian Interior Ministry officer searching for three journalists from the Guardian and the BBC. My fear is that these journalists aren’t taking the Russian threat in an all-but-declared war zone seriously — ask Anna Politkovskaya or Alexander Litvinenko what those consequences are — that is, if they were still alive.


Simon Ostrovsky of VICE News has been compiling quite possibly the best video dispatches and has been one of the hardest working daredevil journalists in Ukraine and on Crimea. I’m simultaneously astonished and impressed with his work; this is how journalism should be in our current age. 

